## 3. Results and Discussion

### 3.1 Fragmenting molecules for quantum chemical torsion scans can alter the chemical environment of the torsion.

![**Torsion profiles can be sensitive to small local and remote chemical changes.**
[**A**] QC torsion scans of the central bond in biphenyls in different protonation states. The colors of the QC torsion scans
correspond to the highlighted central bond of the biphenyls. The Wiberg bond order is shown in the box next to the central bond.
[**B**] Same as **A** but with fluorine on the ortho position.
[**C**] Same as **A** but with Chlorine on the ortho position](images/figure-2.svg){#fig:biphenyls}

Small chemical changes to molecules, both local and remote, can drastically alter their electronic properties.
This poses a challenge to force field parametrization, specifically that of torsion parameters which rely on computationally expensive QC torsion scans for reference data [cite rowley preprint].
Given how poorly QC torsion scans scale with molecular size, molecules are fragmented to smaller entities to generate the reference data.
The assumption is that torsion scans generated for substructures can be used as reference data for other molecules that share the substructure.
However, seemingly similar torsion types in different chemical environments can have very different torsion potential.
This is particularly apparent in conjugated systems where small, remote changes can exert strong electron-donating or -withdrawing effects thus altering torsional barrier heights as we have shown [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.3238643].
When such remote changes are combined with other more local changes that induce both electronic effects and steric clashes, remote effects can be either amplified or counteracted.

We illustrate such changes in an example as shown in Figure @fig:biphenyls.
Figure @fig:biphenyls A shows a series of biphenyls in different protonation states.
The central bond in the biphenyls are part of a larger conjugated system.
However, the extent of conjugation changes with small, remote chemical changes.
This is reflected both in the increased barrier heights of the torsion scans and increased Wiberg bond order of the bond.
As the extent of conjugation increases, the Wiberg bond order, or electronic population overlap increases, and resistance to rotation increases as reflected in increasing torsion barrier heights.
For @fig:biphenyls A, the remote change exerts a very strong effect on the central bond.
This effect decreases with small local chemical changes that induce steric effects as shown in @fig:biphenyls B and C.
When halogens, which are larger than hydrogens, are placed in the ortho position, the local steric effect increases the energy of the planar conformation needed for conjugation which counteracts the remote effects.
Thus, while the energy barrier and WBOs increase for the cation, anion and zwitterion, the changes are less drastic for larger substituents at the ortho position.
Figure @fig:biphenyls C shows the series of torsion scans for chloro-pyridyl-phenol.
While the torsion barrier heights increase as the WBO increase, the increase is less drastic as the flouro-pyridyl-phenol series (Figure @fig:biphenyls B) because chlorine is larger than fluorine.

The trends shown in this example illustrate why fragmenting molecules appropriately for QC torsion scans currently still requires human expertise and is difficult to automate.
In these cases, small remote changes gradually perturbed the conjugation of the central bond.
In addition, these changes were different for similar molecules with different local environments.
When fragmenting molecules, we aim to avoid destroying a bond's chemical environment by naively removing an important remote substituent.


### 3.2 A simple fragmentation scheme can use the WBO to preserve the chemical environment around a torsion

![**Illustration of fragmentation scheme using WBOs.**
First, we find the rotatable bonds and calculate their ELF10 WBOs.
Then, for each rotatable bond, we generate the minimal fragment about each rotatable bond as described in the text (Section 3.4).
We then compute ELF10 WBOs for the central torsion bonds around which the minimal fragments were generated and check if the new ELF10 WBO is within the disruption threshold relative to the parent's LEF10 WBO.
If the absolute difference is greater than the disruption threshold, substituents are added, one at a time, and the ELF10 WBO is recalculated. The red circle illustrates such a fragment.
The absolute difference of its WBO relative to the parent (0.99 in the minimal fragment vs 1.09 in the parent molecule) is greater than the disruption threshold of 0.03.
The fragment continues to grow until the central bond's ELF10 WBO is within the disruption threshold of the ELF10 WBO of the bond in the parent molecule.
The green circle illustrates the better, larger fragment that has an ELF10 WBO on its central bond closer to the ELF10 WBO on the same bond in the parent molecules.](images/fragmentation_scheme.svg){#fig:frag_scheme}

The WBO is a robust indicator of changes in torsion energy barrier heights for related torsions [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.3238643].
Therefore, if a fragment's WBO deviates too much from its parent WBO at the same bond, the fragmentation is probably inadequate.
Using this concept, we extended the fragment-and-cap scheme proposed by [@doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00373] by considering resonance via WBOs.
The fragment-and-cap scheme generates minimal torsion fragments that include the four torsion atoms and the relevant neighboring atoms that define the local chemical environment [@@doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00373].
While the scheme captures the local chemical environment, it sometimes does not adequately capture through-bond non-local effects, specifically when extended conjugated systems are involved.
We extend the scheme to include the remote substituents that contribute to the electronic overlap across the central torsion bonds by using the WBO as indicators of how well the chemical environment was preserved.

However, WBOs are conformation-dependent [@doi:10.1039/c6ra17055b, 10.1021/ja00029a005, @doi:10.5281/zenodo.3238643] which can result in different fragments if the conformations change.
Therefore, we use the Electronically Least-Interacting Functional groups (ELF10) WBOs, a method available in the OpenEye toolkit `quacpac` [@url:https://docs.eyesopen.com/applications/quacpac/index.html] that generates WBOs that are relatively insensitive to the initial conformation.
But since conformation-dependent variance of WBO distributions are higher for conjugated bonds, we can then use the conformation-dependent distribution of WBOs over conformation to asses whether the chemical environment has been significantly perturbed as described in more detail in section 3.3.

The scheme, illustrated in Figure @fig:frag_scheme is as follows:

1. Find acyclic bond. For this step we use the SMARTS pattern `[!$(*#*)&!D1]-,=;!@[!$(*#*)&!D1]`.
2. Keep the four atoms in the torsion quartet and all atoms bonded to those atoms. This ensures that all 1-5 atoms are included in the minimal fragment.
3. If any of the atoms are part of a ring or functional group shown in Table @tbl:fgroups, include ring and functional groups atoms to avoid ring breaking and fragmenting functional groups that contain more than one heteroatom.
The list in Table @tbl:groups are the functional groups that were present in the validation and is therefor not exhaustive.
4. Keep all ortho substitutents relative to the torsion quartet atoms.
5. N, O and S are capped with methyl. All other open valence atoms are capped with hydrogen.
6. Calculate ELF10 WBO for fragment.
5. If the fragment's ELF10 WBO differs by more than a user defined threshold, continue grow out one bond at a time until the
fragment's ELF10 WBO is within the threshold of the parent ELF10 WBO.

| Chemical group | SMARTS pattern |
|---|---|
| hydrazine | `[NX3][NX3]` |
| hydrazone | `[NX3][NX2]` |
| nitric oxide | `[N]-[O]` |
| amide |  `[#7][#6](=[#8])`, `[#7][#6](-[O-])`|
| urea | `[NX3][CX3](=[OX1])[NX3]` |
| aldehyde | `[CX3H1](=O)[#6]` |
| sulfoxide | `[#16X3]=[OX1]`, `[#16X3+][OX1-]`|
| sulfonyl | `[#16X4](=[OX1])=([OX1])` |
| sulfinic acid | `[#16X3](=[OX1])[OX2H,OX1H0-]` |
| sulfinamide | `[#16X4](=[OX1])=([OX1])([NX3R0])` |
| sulfonic acid | `[#16X4](=[OX1])(=[OX1])[OX2H,OX1H0-]` |
| phosphine oxide | `[PX4](=[OX1])([#6])([#6])([#6])` |
| phosphonate | `P(=[OX1])([OX2H,OX1-])([OX2H,OX1-])` |
| phosphate | `[PX4](=[OX1])([#8])([#8])([#8])` |
| carboxylic acid | `[CX3](=O)[OX1H0-,OX2H1]` |
| nitro | `([NX3+](=O)[O-])`, `([NX3](=O)=O)` |
| ester | `[CX3](=O)[OX2H0]` |
| tri-halides | `[#6]((([F,Cl,I,Br])[F,Cl,I,Br])[F,Cl,I,Br])`

Table: **Functional groups kept whole during fragmentation.**
This list includes functional groups that were present in the validation set.
Users can add their own functional groups they do not want to fragment. {#tbl:fgroups}

### 3.3 Fragmentation schemes can be assessed by their ability to preserve the chemical environment while minimizing fragment size

This fragmentation scheme elaborates upon the method proposed in  [@doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00373] to remedy deficiencies that will be addressed in more detail in section 3.3.2.
However, there are some adjustable hyperparameters.
In order to asses various thresholds and different fragmentation schemes in general, we generated a diverse subset of FDA-approved drug molecules that can be a useful validation set.
The goal of this set was to find molecules that are challenging to fragment, such that the molecules in this set have bonds that are sensitive to remote substituent changes.
In other words, we sought to create a set which is particularly difficult for conventional techniques to fragment well in order to test our method.
To find these molecules, we first filtered DrugBank (version 5.1.3 downloaded on 2019-06-06) [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1037] with the following criteria:

1. FDA-approved small molecules
2. Largest ring size has less than 14 heavy atoms
3. Smallest ring size has at least 3 heavy atoms
4. Molecule has less than 10 rotatable bonds
4. Molecule must have at least one aromatic ring
5. Molecule has only one connected component

![**Representative diverse drug-like molecules used to generate the validation set.**
Twenty representative molecules in the validation set after filtering DrugBank shown here to illustrate the diversity
of the set.](images/representative_molecules.svg){#fig:validation_set_rep}

This left us with 730 small molecules.
Representative molecules are shown in Figure @fig:validation_set_rep.
Charged molecules exacerbate remote substituent sensitivity and many molecules are in charged states at physiological pH.
To ensure that our dataset is representative of drugs at physiological pH, we used the OpenEye `EnumerateReasonableTautomers` to generate tautomers that are likely significantly populated at pH ~7.4 [@url:https://docs.eyesopen.com/applications/quacpac/index.html]. This tautomer enumeration extended the set to 1289 small molecules.
We then generated all possible fragments of these molecules by using a combinatorial fragmentation scheme.
In this scheme, every rotatable bond is fragmented and then all possible connected fragments are generated where the smallest fragment has 4 heavy atoms and the largest fragment is the parent molecule.
This scheme generated ~300,000 fragments.

To asses how much the chemical environments were perturbed in these fragments, we generated conformation-dependent WBO distributions for every fragment and compared them to the parents' WBO distributions.
Using the conformation-dependent WBO distributions rather than ELF10 WBOs for assessment allowed us to more fully capture the bonds' chemical environment because changes in variance are also indicative of change in conjugation [@@doi:10.5281/zenodo.3238643].
For each fragment, OpenEye Omega [@doi:10.1021/ci100031x, @doi:10.1021/ci300314k.] was used to generate conformers and the AM1 WBO was calculated for every bond in every conformer.
This resulted in a distribution of WBOs for all bonds in all fragments.
The resulting dataset captures both obvious and subtle through-bond non-local chemical changes.

![**Truncating critical chemical substituents leads to significant changes in the WBO distributions.**
**[A]** An illustrative example of the shift in the conformational-dependent WBO distributions due to crucial chemical changes such as
the loss of fluorine.
The distributions are shaded with their corresponding distance score shown in the color bar on the right.
The parent molecule's WBO distribution (numbered 4) is shaded red.
Selected distributions are outlined and the corresponding fragments are shown in **C**.
**[B]** Computational cost of fragment (NHeavy^2.6^) vs distance score (Maximum Mean Discrepancy, Equation @eq:mmd_sqrd) of the fragment indicates that it is possible to reduce the cost of torsion scans without destroying the torsion profile.
The black line is the Pareto front, or the most computational inexpensive fragment with the best score at that size.
The selected fragment should be on the Pareto front at the lower left corner.
**[C]** Selected fragments. Bonds are highlighted with their distance score.
The ELF10 WBO is shown in the boxes above the highlighted bonds.](images/exhaustive-fragmentation.svg){#fig:dabrafenib_wbo_dists}

Figure {@fig:dabrafenib_wbo_dists} shows an example of the results of exhaustive fragmentation and how this data can be used to benchmark fragmentation schemes.
The parent molecule, Dabrafenib (Figure {@fig:dabrafenib_wbo_dists}, C 4) was fragmented at all rotatable bond which resulted in 11 fragments (in this example, the trimethyl was not fragmented).
Of these fragments, all connected combinations were generated resulting in 108 connected fragments.
Of those 108 fragments, 44 fragments contained the bond between the sulfur in the sulfonamide and phenyl ring highlighted in fragments in Figure {@fig:dabrafenib_wbo_dists}, C.

When the WBOs were calculated for all Omega generated conformers for each of the 44 fragments, the resulting WBO distributions clustered into 4 bins as illustrated with the color and location of the distributions in Figure {@fig:dabrafenib_wbo_dists}, A.
The shifts of the distributions corresponded to specific remote substituent changes---in this case, the loss of fluorine of the ring bonded to the sulfur and the phenyl ring bonded to the nitrogen in the sulfonamide.
Excluding the flourine on the other ring (bonded to the nitrogen) does not influence this metric as seen by the significant overlap between the WBO distribution of the parent and fragment 3 in Figure @fig:dabrafenib_wbo_dists A.
Here, these two changes cause the distributions to shift in opposite directions.
While the loss of a fluorine on the phenyl bonded to the sulfur shifts the distribution to the right, the loss of the ring bonded to the nitrogen shifts the distributions to the left illustrating that the changes can counteract each others.
Fragments 2, 3, 4, and 6 (Figure {@fig:dabrafenib_wbo_dists}C) all contain two fluorine and the phenyl bonded to the nitrogen and fall in the same cluster as the parent molecule, regardless if the rest of the molecule is included in the fragment.
Fragments 7 and 9 only have one fluorine on the phenyl ring and both of their distributions are shifted to the right relative to the parent WBO distribution.
Fragments 10 and 11 have no fluorine on the ring and are shifted to the right even further.
Since removing the ring bonded to the nitrogen shifts the WBO distribution in the opposite direction,
fragment 1, while having two fluorine, is shifted to the left of the parent distribution, fragment 5 WBO distribution overlaps with the parent WBO distribution even if it only has one fluorine, and fragment 8 is only shifted slightly to the right of the parent WBO distribution with no fluorine.

#### 3.3.1 WBO distributions can measure how well fragments preserve the chemical environment around the torion

Each fragment needs to be assigned a score of how well is preserves its parent chemical environment.
To score each fragment, we compare the conformer dependent WBO distribution for a bond in a fragment against the WBO conformer-dependent distribution of the same bond in the parent molecule.
To compare these distributions, we compute the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) [@url:http://jmlr.csail.mit.edu/papers/v13/gretton12a.html] for the fragment distribution to the parent as follows:

\begin{equation} MMD(P, Q) = \| \mathbb{E}_{X\sim P}[\varphi(X)] - \mathbb{E}_{Y\sim Q}[\varphi(Y)]\|_{\mathcal{H}} \end{equation}

where the feature map $\varphi: \mathcal{X} \rightarrow \mathcal{H}$ we use is squared $\varphi(x) = (x, x^2)$ and the
MMD becomes:

$$MMD = \sqrt{(\mathbb{E}[X]-\mathbb{E}[Y])^2 + (\mathbb{E}[X^2] - \mathbb{E}[Y^2])^2}$${#eq:mmd_sqrd}

where \mathbb{E}[X] is the expected value of the parent WBO and \mathbb{E}[Y] is the expected value of fragment WBO.
Including the squared mean incorporates the second moment of the distribution and helps distinguish distributions both with different means and variances.
It is important to incorporate changes in variance given how the variance of the WBO distributions change for different chemical environments [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.3238643].
In general, changes in WBO distribution variance corresponds to changes in relative torsion barrier heights [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.3238643].


In Figure {@fig:dabrafenib_wbo_dists}, the MMD which we refer to distance score is shown with the color map.
The distributions in Figure {@fig:dabrafenib_wbo_dists}, A are shaded with the distance score.
The scores clearly differentiates the shifted distributions.

#### 3.3.2 Good fragmentation schemes minimize both chemical environment disruption and fragment size

The goal of our fragmentation scheme is to find fragments that have a WBO distribution of the bond of interest closest the the parent while minimizing the computational cost of the fragment.
We estimate the computational cost of a fragment as NHeavy^2.6^ as shown in Figure @fig:b3lyp_scaling A.
The distance score calculated with MMD indicates how far the fragment's WBO distribution is or how much the chemical environment changed from its parent.
When we plot the fragment size against this score, the points that fall on the Pareto front [@doi:10.1007/s00158-003-0368-6] are the ones where the distance score is the best for for a given fragment size or vice versa.

Figure {@fig:dabrafenib_wbo_dists}, B shows an illustrative example of this.
The Pareto front is shown with a black line and the fragment data points on the front are indicated with a black circles.
The numbers on the annotated data points correspond the the numbered fragments in Figure {@fig:dabrafenib_wbo_dists}, C.
Fragment 6 is the smallest fragment with the shortest distance to the parent molecule.
It has the important chemical moieties, such as all three fluorine and the ring bonded to the nitrogen.
While fragments 2 and 5 are also on the Pareto front, the missing ring and fluorine increase the distance score, however, it is not clear if this difference is significant.

Fragment 3, which is missing the fluorine on the ring bonded to the nitrogen, is shifted in the distance score relative to the parent by the same amount as fragment 2 is from 6, even if it has all other parts of the molecule.
Both the chemical change and shift in distance scores are small, but they are consistent for both larger and smaller fragments.
adding credence to the fact that the small difference in the distance score does pick up on this chemical change.
Fragments 7 and 11 illustrate that having larger fragments will not improve the distance score if the important remote substituents are not present in the fragment.
Fragment 9, while significantly smaller than fragment 7, has the same distance score because they both are missing the important fluorine.
Fragments 10 and 11 show the same trend for the fragments missing both fluorine.
While fragments 1, 5, and 8 are all small, the loss of the ring results in larger distance scores.


The goal of any fragmentation scheme is to find fragments on the Pareto front that minimize both the changes in the chemical environment of the bond and fragment size.
In other words, they should be on the lower left corner of the plot.

To assess the quality our fragmentation scheme, we wanted to find the molecules that are challenging to fragment.
To do that, we defined a bond sensitivity score as follows.
For each bond, find all fragments from the exhaustive fragmentation experiment that include the bond, calculate the distance score to the parent, and find the fragment with the maximum distance.
This maximum distance score is the sensitivity score of the bond.
This is a good indication of a bond's sensitivity to removal of remote substituents because the more its WBO distribution shifts relative to the parent when fragmented, the more the electronic population overlap around that bond changes with remote chemical changes.
We then chose the top 100 molecules that had bonds where fragments that included all 1-5 atoms around the central bond had the highest sensitivity scores
Selected molecules with bonds highlighted according to their sensitivity are shown in Figure {@fig:validation_set}.
The rest of the molecules are shown in SI Figure @fig:full_validation_set.
This set included many molecules in charged states.


![**Some bonds are more sensitive to removal of remote substituents and are therefore challenging to fragment.**
Selected molecules of the validation set are shown to illustrate differential bond sensitivity to remote substituent changes.
Bonds are highlighted by how sensitive they are to remote substituent changes as quantified by the bond sensitivity score.
The bond sensitivity score is defined as the maximum distance score of that bond in different fragments as defined in the text.
 (see Figure @fig:dabrafenib_wbo_dists A and B).
Fragments used to get the maximum distances include all 1-5 atoms around the highlighted bonds.
Molecules 10-12 also show
the atoms the bonds are sensitive to.
The atoms are circled with the same color as the bond that is sensitive to it.
The rest of the molecules used in the validation set are shown in SI Figure @fig:full_validation_set ](images/figure-10_inkscape.svg){#fig:validation_set}


Not all bonds are equally sensitive to such changes.
This is shown by the magnitude by which the sensitivity score varies for bonds within the same molecule as shown in Figure {@fig:validation_set}.
The general trend observed is that conjugated bonds,
and bonds including atoms with lone pairs such as N, O, and S, are more sensitive to peripheral cuts.
Molecules 10-12 (Figure {@fig:validation_set}) also show which chemical moiety the bond is sensitive to, indicated by circles around the atoms which are colored with the corresponding bond's sensitivity score.
In molecule 10, the WBO distribution of the amide bond shifts significantly if the positively charged nitrogen is remove regardless if the rest of the molecule is intact (data not shown).
In molecule 11, the removal of the phosphate group shifts the distribution of the red bond.
In molecule 12, both the amide and ester bond are sensitive to the same negatively charged oxygen indicated by two circles around the oxygen.

![**Different WBO disruption thresholds result in different accuracy vs cost trade-offs.**
Computational cost vs distance score of the fragments for the bonds in the benchmark set shown in Figure {@fig:full_validation_set}.
Computational cost is proportional to NHeavy^2.6^ as estimated in Figure @fig:b3lyp_scaling, A.
The threshold is the maximum amount of change allowed in the ELF10 WBO relative to the parent molecules's ELF10 WBO during fragmentation.](images/cost-vs-accuracy.svg){#fig:joint_plots}

We aim to identify parameters for our fragmentation scheme that maximize the number of fragments that end up in that lower left corner of the Pareto front (illustrated in Figure {@fig:dabrafenib_wbo_dists}, B).
To do that, we generated fragments for the highly sensitive bonds in the 100 molecules shown in SI Figure {@fig:full_validation_set} using different disruption thresholds.
For every fragment, we found the distance score of their fragments' WBO distribution and their computational cost.
We then plotted all fragments from the validation set for different thresholds (Figure {@fig:joint_plots}).
When the threshold is low, the fragmentation scheme will generate fragments which have very good distance scores, but many of them will be too big for computationally efficient QC torsion scan.
On the other hand, when the disruption threshold is too low, the scheme generates fragments that are small but the distance scores are too big.
For the molecules we tested, a threshold of 0.03 leads to the most fragments in the lower left quadrant (defined as cost < 4000 seconds per gradient evaluation and score < 0.05) as shown in table @tbl:benchmark.

This threshold is similar to what we found when we looked at the distribution of standard deviations for WBO distributions with respect to conformations (Figure @fig:standard_deviations, blue).
Most of them fall under 0.03.
Both of these data points lead us to recommend a WBO disruption threshold of 0.03 for our fragmentation scheme.
While the current scheme does not provide a perfect solution, plots in Figure {@fig:joint_plots} shows fewer fragments outside of the lower left region for thresholds 0.01, 0.03 and 0.05.
This scheme  performs better than other schemes such as the scheme Pfizer used in [@doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00373](Figure {@fig:joint_plots}, lower right and table @tbl:benchmark).

|WBO disruption threshold | Number of fragments in optimal fragment quadrant |
|---|---|
| 0.001 | 182 |
| 0.005 | 232 |
| 0.01 | 268 |
| 0.03 | 284 |
| 0.05 | 243 |
| 0.07 | 208 |
| 0.1 | 209 |
| Pfizer scheme from @doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00373 | 197 |

Table: **Number of fragments in the lower left quadrant in Figure {@fig:joint_plots} defined as a distance score less than
0.1 and computational cost less than 4000 seconds.** {#tbl:benchmark}

#### 3.3.3 Benchmark results reveal chemical groups that induce long range effects

![**Using the WBO as an indicator of chemical environment disruption improves performance of the fragmentation algorithm.**
Distribution of differences in distance scores for fragments in the validation set (SI Figure @fig:full_validation_set) generated using
Pfizer's rules and our scheme using 0.03 as the disruption threshold.
For many bonds, both approaches yield equally performing fragments (shown in green).
In some cases, Pfizer's rules [@doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00373] perform better than our scheme (shown in red); however, the differences are usually very small.
In most cases, using the WBO as an indicator improves the distance score (shown in blue).](images/combined-score-differences.svg){#fig:difference_hist}

In the benchmark experiment (Figure @fig:joint_plots), Omega was used to generate the conformers for which the WBOs were calculated.
Omega aims to generate low energy conformers [@doi:10.1021/ci100031x] and in some cases, fragments only have one or two low energy conformers so it is not clear how accurate the distances measured are.
In addition, only comparing low energy conformers do not fully capture torsion energy barriers which we also want to ensure remain accurate relative to their parent's torsion energy scan.

To mitigate the these issues when validating our scheme, we generated higher energy conformers by driving the torsions and added those WBOs to the distributions.
Furthermore, since we know that WBOs from structures in a QC torsion scan are anti correlated with the QC torsion energy scan [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.3238643], adding WBOs from higher energy conformers to the distributions provided a better validation of our method than examining only the distance between WBOs from low energy omega-generated conformers.
The differences in distances of these distributions from fragments generated with our scheme and [@doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00373] is shown in Figure @fig:difference_hist.

For many molecules, using a common sense rule based approach, such as the one used in [@doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00373] to fragmenting molecules, will yield fragments that are the same fragments generated with our scheme shown in green in Figure {@fig:difference_hist}, and sometimes can even perform slightly better than using the WBO as an indicator (Figure {@fig:difference_hist}, red).
However, in some cases, especially if certain chemical groups are involved, using the WBO as an indicator significantly improves the electron population overlap about the bonds and brings them closer to their parent's chemical environment (Figure @fig:difference_hist, blue).
It is important to note that when the fragment generated from both scheme are the same (green in Figure @fig:difference_hist), they are not necessarily the optimal fragment and both schemes can perform equally poorly (SI Figure @fig:equal-fragments, A, B, and C).
However, in most cases both fragments do perform well (SI Figure @fig:equal-fragments, D, E, and F).

![**Some chemical groups induce non local effects that are captured in fragments when using the WBO as an indicator of chemical environments.**
Wiberg bond order distributions for parent molecules (shown in blue) and fragments generated with Pfizer rules (shown in orange) and our
scheme (shown in green).
The distribution is over all Omega generated conformers and high energy conformers from torsion drives.
The rug plot at the bottom of the distributions are tick marks for each observation.
This figure shows eight chemical groups where the WBO distributions of the highlighted bonds change when those groups are removed.
The ELF10 WBO is shown in the boxes next to the highlighted bonds and the chemical groups are circled in the parent and our fragment.
Better overlap with the blue, parent distribution, indicates a fragment where the chemical environment around the highlighted bond is closer to the parent environment.
In the examples shown here, our scheme generates fragments where the WBO distribution of the bond of interest has better overlap with the parent WBO distribution.
Changes are consistent across the validation set.
Since the parent molecule in **[G]** has several rotatable bonds, there are many tick marks in its rug plot.
](images/figure_12.svg){#fig:chemical_groups}

Upon closer inspection of the validation set, we found eight chemical groups that induce long range effects to sensitive bonds shown in
Figure @fig:chemical_groups.
These chemical groups with representative examples are shown in Figure @fig:chemical_groups.
The groups are ordered by how strongly they induce long range effect, in decreasing order. The most dramatic change happens when a phosphate group is removed (Figure @fig:chemical_groups, A).
The variance of the WBO distribution increases which conveys an increase in relative energies of conformers in the QC torsion scans.
In other molecules where phosphates are removed, the variance can decrease even if the phosphate group is ten bonds away (Figure @fig:failure_modes, F and SI Figure @fig:si-phosphate E).

In Figure @fig:chemical_groups, B, removing a protonated nitrogen that is double bonded causes the WBO distribution to shift and the variance to increase.
Long range effects are seen in other molecules with similar chemical patterns up to eight bonds away (SI Figure @fig:si-nitrogen, E).
Removing a nitrile group (Figure @fig:chemical_groups, C) and sulfonamide group (Figure @fig:chemical_groups, D) have similar effects on the WBO distributions which is also consistent with other molecules that contain these groups up to three bonds away (SI Figures @fig:si-nitrile and @fig:si-sulfonamide).
A protonated nitrogen and deprotonated oxygen (Figure @fig:chemical_groups E and F) can effects bonds between 3-6 bonds away (SI Figures @fig:si-nitrogen and @fig:si-oxygen).
While the changes in distributions for removing a nitro group and sulfur (Figure @fig:chemical_groups, G and H) are not as big as other chemical groups, they are mostly consistent across other molecules in the validation set (SI Figures @fig:si-nitro and @fig:si-sulfur).

![**Using the WBO as an indicator when fragmenting can still fail to find the optimal fragment.**
Our scheme can fail in several ways.
**[A]** A smaller fragment (shown in orange) is just as good as a larger fragment (shown in green) even if the ELF10 WBO estimate of the bond in the smaller fragment relative to its parent (shown in blue) is more than the disruption threshold.
**[B]** While our scheme finds a fragment with good overlap of the WBO distributions (shown in green), it is not the smallest fragment possible with good distributions overlap (smallest
fragment with good overlap is shown in purple).
**[C]** The fragment we find is bigger than what the simple scheme finds (shown in orange) but without improving the WBO overlap (green). The optimal fragment that neither scheme generates is shown in purple.
**[D]** Our scheme finds a larger fragment that has worse WBO distribution overlap.
**[E]** and **[F]**. Sometimes, almost the entire molecule is needed to achieve good WBO distribution overlap between the fragment and the parent. This is not a failure mode but inherent to the challenge of fragmenting molecules for QC calculations.
](images/figure-14.svg){#fig:failure_modes}

While our scheme captures long range effects that a simple rule based approach does not, it is not an optimal solution and will sometimes fail to find the most optimal fragment.
By optimal we mean the smallest fragment that retains the torsion potential of the bond in the parent molecule.
Our scheme can fail in multiple ways as illustrated in Figure @fig:failure_modes and listed below.

1. The selected fragment has good WBO distributions overlap but is not the smallest fragment.
This is illustrated in both Figures @fig:failure_modes A and B.
In A, the fragment that Pfizer scheme find is smaller and has a WBO distribution that is close to the parent's WBO distribution (MMD 0.019).
In this case, the ELF10 WBO estimate of the bond in the fragment is 0.11 lower than the ELF10 WBO estimate in the parent molecule.
In B, our fragment has better WBO distribution overlap with the parent WBO distribution vs using Pfizer's scheme (0.017 vs 0.212), but it is not the smallest fragment.
According to the fragment highlighted in purple, the benzene ring is not required to achieve good overlap of the WBO distributions (0.051).

2. Sometimes, the fragments we find are bigger than Pfizer's scheme fragment and the remote substituents do not improve the WBO distribution overlap (MMD 0.079 vs 0.071) (Figure @fig:failure_modes C).
The better fragment is shown in purple. It is both smaller and has better overlap (MMD 0.027) than the orange and green fragment.

3. Sometimes, the fragment we find is both larger and has worse overlap (Figure @fig:failure_modes, D; 0.054 vs 0.024) than what the Pfizer's scheme generates.

4. While it is usually possible to find a fragment that is significantly smaller than the parent and retains remote substituent effects, the effects are sometimes more than 3-6 bonds away and a large fragment is needed to accurately represent the chemical environment of the parent molecule.
Two such examples are shown in Figure @fig:failure_modes E and F.
In E, not only is the protonated nitrogen needed (shown in green), but the alcohol group is also needed to achieve good WBO distribution overlap (shown in purple).
In F, the phosphate group nine bonds away from the bond of interest is needed to capture the density of of the mode at 1.2 (shown in blue and purple).

As we have shown, using the WBO as an indicator for fragmentation is a good general approach, albeit not always optimal.
To always find the optimal fragment, all possible fragments would need to be generated and their WBOs calculated.
As discussed in section 2.1, the search space for all possible fragments can become very large which would be too costly to enumerate.
Therefore, we chose to use heuristics discussed in the detailed methods (section 5.2.3) to grow out the fragments when the WBO on the central bond indicates that the chemical environment has been disrupted.


#### 3.3.4 Validating the fragmentation scheme

![**Using WBO as a criteria for fragmentation improves the chemical equivalency of the fragment to the substructure in the parent molecule.**
Representative QC torsion profiles of drug molecules (parent molecules shown in blue), fragments generated from rule based scheme (shown in orange) and fragments generated with the WBO scheme (green).
**[A]** Torsion profile about the highlighted bond in Chloroprocaine for the parent molecule (blue), WBO scheme (green) and simple rules (orange).
**[B]** Same as **A** for Phenformin.
**[C]** Same as **A** for Furosemide.
**[D]** Same as **A** for Nitazoxanide. Here, the parent and fragment generated with the WBO scheme are the same.
**[E]** Same as **A** for Cimetidine.
**[F]** Same as **C** for Furosemide.
](images/validate-fragmenter.svg){#fig:validate_fragmenter}


To validate our fragmentation scheme, we ran several series of torsion scans on parent molecules and fragments - both fragments generated using only the rules used in [@doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00373 ] and fragments using our WBO based scheme.
For all the molecules we tested, we found that the torsion scans of the fragments using the different schemes differed significantly as shown in Figure @fig:validate_fragmenter
To avoid high computational cost and through-space intramolecular interactions, we chose parent molecules that were less than 21 heavy atoms.
Therefore, some of the fragments found by our WBO scheme were the parent molecules (Figures @fig:validate_fragmenter D and F).
For the cases where the WBO scheme generated fragments that were smaller than the parent molecules, the QC torsion scan of those fragments were closer to the QC torsion scans in the parent molecule than for the fragments generated with simple rules.
The only exception is Figure @fig:validate_fragmenter E where the QC scan of the fragment without the nitrile has a smaller RMSE relative to the parent QC scan as the WBO generated fragment (RMSE 6.38 vs 6.97).
This discrepancy is a result of the asymmetry in the parent's molecule QC torsion scan (blue scan).
The asymmetry arises from favorable through-space interactions between the nitrile and hydrogens on the methyl on the imidazole at dihedral angles 15$^{\circ}$ - 115$^{\circ}$.
Such long-range through-space favorable interactions are effects that should be handled by non-bonded force field terms so they should be avoided in the data used to fit torsion parameters to.
Therefore, we view Figure @fig:validate E as a good result.