## Conclusion

We have shown that the AM1 ELF10 WBO estimate is a simple, yet informative quantity about the extent of binding between two connecting atoms,
thus descriptive of a bond's chemical environment, its level of conjugation, and resistance to rotation.
We can use the change in WBO of a bond to quantify the amount of disruption of its chemical environment due to remote chemical
substituent changes, specifically for bonds that are sensitive to peripheral chemical changes such as bonds in or adjacent to
conjugated systems, or bonds involving atoms that have lone pairs.


We used this concept to extend a rule-based fragmentation scheme to improve the resulting fragments.
By using the WBO of the central bond as an indicator of its chemical environment disruption, our extension adds remote substituents until the change in WBO is lower than a user defined threshold.
This simple addition improves the quality of the resulting fragments, specifically for bonds in conjugated systems and molecules with remote substituents that have long-range effects.
We generated a validation set using exhaustive fragmentation to benchmark fragmentation schemes and found that a threshold of 0.03 will find the most fragments that minimize both fragment size and distance to the parent's conformation distribution about the bond.
We also found eight chemical groups that have long-range effects on sensitive bonds and their inclusion is necessary to recapitulate a parent's chemical environment even if they are 3-6 bonds away from the central bond.

Overall, we believe the approach presented here provides a good general approach to fragment molecules for QC data generation to assist in parametrization of general force fields.
Its approach on our test set seems superior to that of straightforward alternatives.
The method is currently available as an open source Python library [@url:https://github.com/openforcefield/fragmenter].
We plan ot apply this approach broadly within the OpenFF Initiative and incorporate this functionality in the open force field toolkit [@url:https://github.com/openforcefield/openforcefield]
In the future, this approach can be made more efficient by using machine learning methods to learn the chemical patterns that should not be fragmented using the dataset shared here.