## 5. Detailed methods

#### 5.1 Exhaustive fragmentation dataset

The exhaustive fragmentation dataset was generated by filtering DrugBank version (version 5.1.3 downloaded on 2019-06-06) [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1037] with criteria described in section 4 and repeated here for clarity:

1. FDA approved
2. Ring sized between 3 and 14 heavy atoms
3. Rotatable bonds between 4 and 10
4. At least one aromatic ring
5. Only a single connected component

This left us with 730 molecules.
To expand protonation and tautomeric states, we used `OEGetReasonableTautomers` from QUACPAC (OpenEye ToolKit version 2019.Apr.2) in the
`states.py` module in `fragmenter` (version v0.0.2+175.g6fbbf32 for this original set, but versions v0.0.3, v0.0.4 and 0.0.6 will
generate the same results with the same options).
We set `pKaNorm` to True so that the ionization state of each tautomer is assigned to a predominant state at pH ~ 7.4.
This generated 1289 molecules.
The smi file with all 1289 molecules is located in the manuscript's [data repository](https://github.com/choderalab/fragmenter_data/blob/master/combinatorial_fragmentation/enumerate_states/validation_set.smi)

We then used the `CombinatorialFragmenter` from `fragmenter` version v0.0.2+179.g0e7e9e3 (versions v0.0.3 and v0.0.4 will generate
the same fragments with the same options) to generate all possible fragments for each molecules.
We set the option `functional_groups` to False so that all functional groups besides rings will also get fragmented so we can use the data to explore which functional groups
should not be fragmented. We used the default settings for all other options ( `min_rotor` is 1 and `min_heavy_atoms` is 4 so that the smallest fragments have at least one torsion.
`max_rotors` is the number of rotors in the parent molecules so that the largest fragment generated is one less rotor than the parent molecule).
This generated ~300,000 fragments.

We then used Omega (OpenEye version 2019.Apr.2) to generate conformers for each fragment and calculated each conformer's WBOs as described above.
All scripts used to generate this dataset are in
[github.com/choderalab/fragmenter_data/combinatorial_fragmentation](https://github.com/choderalab/fragmenter_data/tree/master/combinatorial_fragmentation).
The dataset is available as zip files on Zenodo [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.3977671].

The benchmark set used to evaluate disruption thresholds and compare to other schemes were chosen as described in Section 3.5.2.
`fragmenter` version 0.0.6 was used to generate fragments for the different schemes and disruption thresholds.

### 5.2 Fragmenting molecules
The `fragmenter` package provides several fragmentation schemes with various options. Below we discuss different modes of
fragmentation and their options.

#### 5.2.1 Exhaustive fragmentation generates all possible fragments of a parent molecule.
This functionality is provided by the `CombinatorialFragmenter` class in the `fragment.py` module. To use this class, the user
needs to provide an openeye molecule. `fragmenter` provides a list of functional groups SMARTS in a yaml file located in `fragmenter/data/fgroup_smarts_combs.yml`
that it will not fragment by default. This list is given in table @tbl:fgroups_comb. The list is different than the default list used on the `WBOFragmenter`
because here the carbon bonded to the functional groups are also tagged. To allow all functional groups to be fragmented, the user can set the parameter
`functional_groups = False`. This option will fragment all bonds besides bond in rings. The user can also provide their own dictionary of
functional group SMARTS patterns that they wish to avoid fragmenting.

| Chemical group | SMARTS pattern |
|---|---|
| amide | `[NX3R0][CX3](=[OX1])` |
| sulfone |`[#16X4](=[OX1])=([OX1])` |
| phosphine_oxide | `[PX4](=[OX1])([CX4])([CX4])` |
| phosphon | `[PX4](=[OX1])([OX2])([OX2])` |
| trimethyl | `[CX4!H]([CX4H3])([CX4H3])([CX4H3])` |
| tri_halide | `[#6]((([F,Cl,I,Br])[F,Cl,I,Br])[F,Cl,I,Br])` |
| carboxylic_acid | `[CX3](=O)[OX2H1]` |
| ester | `[CX3](=O)[OX2H0]` |
| dimethyl | `[CX4H1]([CX4H3])([CX4H3])` |
| carbonyl | `[CX3R0]=[OX1]` |
| alkyne | `[CX2]#[CX2]` |
| nitrile | `[NX1]#[CX2]` |

Table: **Default functional groups that the `CombinatorialFragmenter` preserves whole during fragmentation.**
This list is not comprehensive and is
different than the list used for the `WBOFragmenter` {#tbl:fgroups_comb}

The user can also set the minimum and maximum number of rotatable bonds, and minimum heavy atoms in a fragment.

#### 5.2.2 Generate minimal fragments
The `PfizerFragmenter` implements the scheme developed at Pfizer and described in [@doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00373].
It uses the same list
of functional groups as the `WBOFragmenter` uses.
The user can also provide their own SMARTS patterns of functional groups not to fragment.

#### 5.2.3 Using the WBO as a surrogate for changes in chemical environment.
The `WBOFragmenter` implements the FBO scheme described in this paper. The functional groups that are not fragmented are given in table @tbl:fgroups.
Users can add more SMARTS patterns if needed.

When the WBO on a central bond in a minimal fragment has been disrupted more than the threshold, remote atoms need to be added
onto the fragment.
However, there are multiple ways to grow out a fragment and enumerating all possible ways to find the best one can become too computationally expensive.
Therefore, we need to use heuristics to decide where to add the next atoms.
The two heuristics available in `fragmenter` are:

1. **Shortest path length**
Here, the bond with the shortest path to the central bond is added next.
The rationale for this heuristic is that atoms closer
to the central bond will have a greater influence to the bond's chemical environment.
If more than one connected bond has the shortest path to the central bond, the bond with the higher WBO is added next.

2. **Greatest WBO**
Here, the bonds connected to the fragment that have the greatest WBO is added next.
The rationale for this heuristic is that
bonds with higher WBO are more likely to be involved in extended conjugation that can influence the central bond.

Both of these heuristics will sometimes give different results (Figure @fig:si-heuristics).
We found that for the benchmark set we tested,
the shortest path heuristic preformed slightly better, or found more optimal fragments when compared to using the greatest WBO heuristic (284 vs 262 in the optimal quadrant).
Figure @fig:si-heuristics compares the scores and sizes of fragments generated with different growth paths. The shortest path length
heuristic generates smaller fragments (Figure @fig:si-heuristics **A**)

#### 5.2 Fragmenter validation dataset

The torsion scans shown in Figure @fig:validate_fragmenter were run on QCArchive [@doi:10.1063/1.5052551].
They were computed with the TorsionDrive [@doi:10.26434/chemrxiv.12044673.v1] and geomeTRIC [@url:https://github.com/leeping/geomeTRIC],
as standalone geometry optimizer interfaced with teh QCEngine [@doi:https://github.com/MolSSI/QCEngine] project.
The gradients were computed at the B3LYP-D3(BJ)/DZVP level of theory [@doi:10.1139/v92-079; @doi:10.1063/1.464913, @doi:10.1063/1.3382344; @doi:10.1002/jcc.21759].
The torsion scans are available on QCArchive [@doi:https://qcarchive.molssi.org/] as a `TorsionDriveDataset` named `OpenFF Fragmenter Validation 1.0`.

