## Code and availability
- [GitHub repository](https://github.com/openforcefield/fragmenter) fragmenter code.
- [GitHub repository](https://github.com/choderalab/fragmenter_data) Data generation, analysis scripts and generating plots for the manuscript.
- [GitHub repository](https://github.com/openforcefield/qca-dataset-submission) QCArchive dataset submission scripts.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization: CDS, CIB, JDC;
Methodology: CDS, DGAS;
Software: CDS, DGAS, LPW;
Formal Analysis: CDS;
Investigation: CDS;
Resources: JDC;
Data Curation: CDS, DGAS;
Writing-Original draft: CDS;
Writing-Review and editing: CDS, CIB, DGAS, JF, DLM, JDC;
Visualization: CDS;
Supervision: JDC, CIB, DLM, LPW;
Project Administration: JDC;
Funding Acquisition: CDS, JDC;

## Acknowledgments
CDS was supported by a fellowship from The Molecular Sciences Software Institute under NSF grant ACI-1547580 and an NSF GRFP Fellowship under grant DGE-1257284.
DGAS was supported by NSF grant OAC-1547580 and the Open Force Field Consortium.
CDS, JF and JDC were supported by NSF grant CHE-1738979.
DLM and JDC were supported by NIH grant R01GM132386.
JDC acknowledges support from NIH grant P30CA008748 and the Sloan Kettering Institute.
`{co-authors, Please add whatever grant you were supported by that is missing}`{.red}.
We acknowledge Mehtap Isik, Andrea Rizzi, Gregory Ross, Bas Rustenberg, Patrick Grinaway, Melissa Boby, and other members of the Chodera lab for helpful discussions.
We acknowledge Open Force Field Consortium members, specifically the scientists at Pfizer, Xinjun Hou, Brajesh Rai, and Qingyi Yang, and Caitlin Bannan, Alberta Gobbi, and Adrian Roitberg for helpful discussions.

## Disclosures
JDC was a member of the Scientific Advisory Board for Schr"{o}dinger, LLC during part of this study.
JDC is a current member of the Scientific Advisory Board of OpenEye Scientific Software.
The Chodera laboratory receives or has received funding from multiple sources, including the National Institutes of Health, the National Science Foundation, the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, Relay Therapeutics, Entasis Therapeutics, Silicon Therapeutics, EMD Serono (Merck KGaA), AstraZeneca, Vir Biotechnology, Bayer, XtalPi, the Molecular Sciences Software Institute, the Starr Cancer Consortium, the Open Force Field Consortium, Cycle for Survival, a Louis V. Gerstner Young Investigator Award, and the Sloan Kettering Institute.
A complete funding history for the Chodera lab can be found at http://choderalab.org/funding.

## References {.page_break_before}

<!-- Explicitly insert bibliography here -->
<div id="refs"></div>
